# 1.1 PyGPart

> What is PyGPart?

Great question.

PyGPart stands for Pygame Particle. In simple terms, It's a particle system for pygame.

This is all simple enough but why would you use PyGPart and not a different particle system? PyGPart has a couple really nice features and is focused on optimization.

Some of the features include:
* Caching for a faster experience
* Custom particle support
* Transforms
  
> Wait what's a transform?

Well basically having all or particles look exactly the same through their whole lifetime would be really boring. Our solution to this are *transforms*. Transforms can affect a particles size, direction, or shape over its lifetime. They really are the coolest.

Transforms are what's at the heart of PyGPart. They're what make *your* particle effects interesting.

> Ok that's cool, but I could easily do this on my own.

Ok yes, you can do this on your own. In fact I challenge you to do so. You'll find that implimenting the same features aren't to hard. Ok yeah, somtimes the math is a bit tricky, but you could do this on your own no problem.

> Umm, so what's the point of PyGPart then?

Well, after you've successfully implimented your particle system with your own transforms stop to take a look at performance. "There’s The Rub." (Yes that is Shakespere glad you noticed.)

What you'll find is that rendering a few hundred or maybe even thousand particles really isn't the move.

> And PyGPart has a solution?

Yep

Our solution really isn't that complex. There are probably two performance issues you could have hit.

1. The rendering stage
2. The transform stage

Yes those are in the wrong order, but the rendering stage isn't all that interesting of a fix so I'll talk about it first.

1. Rendering
   
   Ok to fix the rendering stage lets do the smart thing and not render each of our particles separate and just render them all at once.
   
   > How do we do that?
   
   Well it's actually not very fun. We just used groups. (If you don't know what a group is, it's bassically a collection of sprites that pygame will associate and render together. They're also highly optimized.)
   
   I know not fun.

2. Transform
   
   As you probably noticed this takes a big performance toll, editing the images of your particles isn't a great time for your computer.

   > Yes, now tell me how to fix it.

    Well, drum roll please... We don't.

    > What?

    > Then why are we here

    Ok so we don't fix the part where editing the images of your particles takes forever. (And by forever I mean a couple of milliseconds longer then you want.) What we do do is stop editing so many images.

    > Isn't that the point of the transforms though
    
    Yes, let me explain. You may have noticed that most of the particles look exactly the same. (You did, wow!) Well, it is my opinion, and I think your computer will agree, that it is an effective waste of time applying the same transforms over and over. Instead we can just save the image and reuse it over and over.

    > Wait isn't that called caching

    Yeppers, if you remember that was also the first feature listed at the start of our conversation.

So there it is that is how we fix the performance and why PyGPart is so awesome (I might be a bit biased).

___
***Next Up [2.1 Getting Sarted](/docs/2.1_Getting_Started.md)***